What Silence Desires: Female Inheritance and the Romance of Property in the Roman de Silence

Silence, the girl raised as a boy who becomes a minstrel of enormous tal-
ent and a knight of great prowess in the thirteenth-century romance that
modern editors call simply the Roman de Silence, has understandably aroused
the gender-bending curiosity of modern readers. The author, Heldris of Corn-
wall, is otherwise unknown, and the question has even been asked whether
Heldris — like that other Cornwall native Silence herself— was a "transves-
tite she.”1 Silence’s parents conceal her female body with masculine clothes in
order to circumvent a capricious law that prevents women from inheriting
property, but in her life as a man Silence turns out to be a bit too successful
for her own good. She eventually becomes the favorite knight of King Evan
of England, the same king whose law she is dodging, and the plot consists pri-
marily of adventures and misadventures arising from the dramatic possibili-
ties of a cross-dressed hero and the danger of being discovered.
Academic readers of the early twenty-first century have been prepared —
perhaps too well prepared — for the delights and frustrations of such a text
by everything from Shakespearean comedy to feminist theory.2 Despite some
anachronistic excesses, much progress has been made in understanding this
recently-discovered text, e^ecially the unusually large scope it gives to ex-
ploring the construction of gender. A growing body of work also now recog-
nizes the centrality of the “feudal politics of lineage" to Silences story.3 For
Heldris's contemporary audience, property and gender were inextricably
linked as determiners of identity, and the gender games in which the text en-
gages are at least partly a fictionalized space in which to explore other ques-
tions of social identity.4 The law of inheritance that provides the central plot
motivation to Silence is no mere plot device, but rather Speaks to fears and de-
sires with deep roots in the realities of thirteenth-century inheritance prac-
tices. Silence's story, written during a century in which the rapid evolution
of those practices reflects well-known power struggles between kings and
nobles — and driven as it is by a desire to preserve landholdings — may aptly
be called a romance of property rights.
Reading the romance in terms of the desire for property resolves two im-
pediments to interpretation. First, it helps explain the status of the Roman de
Silence as a chivalric verse romance at a time when prose romance and ver-
nacular historiography were in the ascendant.5 Though Heldris does not avail
himself of the legitimating effects of prose or of historical subject matter, the
Roman de Silence does give voice to many of the same preoccupations that
were spurring the rise of prose romance and prose histories at the time of
its composition. Much contemporaneous writing addresses such topics as
dynastic succession and the proper relations of princes and nobles by refer-
ring to an authoritative past that has been idealized into a model for the pres-
ent, a transcendent model that tends to subsume the actions of individuals
into narratives with long (and often tragic) trajectories.6 Heldris, on the other
hand, by translating the secure transmission of landholdings into the object
of a traditional romance quest, orients his narrative around the identity for-
mation of an individual. The practical difficulties faced by thirteenth-centry
nobles in acquiring and holding onto the landed wealth that defined their
identity resonate deeply with the sudden reversals and random interruptions
of Silence's romance narrative, yielding a relationship to contemporary concerns
every bit as tangible as the idealized and linear patterns of contemporaneous
prose narratives. The poem’s heroine makes her way in the world as a disin-
herited heiress whose male disguise is constantly in danger of being discovered,
and her struggle to keep her inheritance, like any other romance quest, has
obstacles that must be overcome. Silence's quest thus shares the characteristic
pitfalls and shifting fortunes common to romance, but it also dramatizes —
from the perfective of an individual heiress — the real-world complications
of the quest for property.
The second benefit of a reading that foregrounds the inheritance of
property is that it allows at least a tentative answer to the question, “What
does Silence desire?” Others have noted that Silence, although she is desired
by many, has no perceptible desires of her own.7 Or, more precisely, her only
explicit statements of desire take a negative form, as in these remarks at the
age of twelve (the threshold of medieval adulthood): '"Ne voel perdre ma
grant honor, I Ne la voel cangier a menor. / Ne voel mon pere desmentir’” ("‘I
don't want to lose my high position; /1 don’t want to exchange it for a lesser,
/ and I don’t want to prove my father a liar'” [2651-2653]).8 The narrator,
who goes along with Silence’s self-negation by using masculine pronouns to
describe her, confirms that her renunciation of desire is habitual: "Et tols jors
ert pres a contraire / A Cho que ses cuers voloit faire" (“He was always ready
to go against / what his heart wanted him to do” [2677-2678]). It is easier
to construe Silence’s negatively-framed statement of desire if we remember
Northrop Frye’s definition of desire's function in romance: “the quest-ro-
mance is the search of the libido or desiring self for a fulfillment that will
deliver it from the anxieties of reality but will still contain that reality.”9 As
a cross-dressed female who aspires to inherit her father's patrimony, Silence
is one sort of desiring subject in this romance of property, one who has her
choice of identity crises: she can be a disinherited heiress or a female knight.
Both alternatives are feudal unthinkables that reflect, in Frye's terms, a cul-
tural desire to be delivered from the uncertainties of noble inheritance but
simultaneously to engage and overcome those anxieties in a romantic fan-
tasy that contains a recognizable feudal reality. And the desire of Silence
and her parents to preserve her inheritance operates in tandem with another
version of the desire to be delivered from feudal uncertainty: since marrying
an heiress was one of the few methods by which a medieval nobleman could
add to his patrimonial holdings and increase his status, Silence also func-
tions as the desired object of the quest.10
Silence gives voice to feudal anxieties via the atmosphere of uncertain
outcomes and shifting procedures that the poem shares with the aristocratic
culture that produced it. The feudal hierarchy was in its application a highly
varied network of practices, with the laws governing inheritance often be-
coming in actual use a game of find-the-loophole. And who got to inher-
it what depended at least as much on custom and local patronage as it did
on law. Both customs and laws were in rapid transformation at the time of
the poem's composition in the second half of the thirteenth century. At this
time, relatively few noble inheritances would have been governed strictly by
primogeniture (even fewer in France than in England), and in fact medi-
eval noblemen — with the help of a gro wing legal profession — went to great
lengths to provide for their daughters, younger sons, and widows. Silence's
father Cador, whose idea it is to cross-dress his daughter, is in one sense do-
ing what every medieval nobleman did: maneuvering to protect his property
and to take care of his family interests. Cador's maneuvering, however, must
operate within strict limits because he and his wife Eufemie hold their land
directly from the king of England, making them tenants-in-chief subject to
stringent royal controls in matters of property succession. They would not
have available to them the legal instruments for designing a custom inheri-
tance package that were becoming increasingly popular with those of lower
aristocratic rank, and the royal decree they circumvent stands as a reminder
that inheritance rights were a major bone of contention between medieval
kings and their greatest vassals.
The application of feudal history to Silence would admittedly be easier if
we knew more details about its author and its first audience, but while it is
impossible to know the provenance of the poem with certainty, the contest
between royal control and baronial privilege was of equal concern in both
France and England during the thirteenth century. In favor of English influ-
ence on the poem, Heldris does claim to be from Cornwall, the setting is in
England, and English law and custom are strikingly relevant to the property
considerations in the text. Lynne Dahmen has convincingly related Silences
themes of lineage and feudal legitimacy to other insular romances of the
period.11 The poem’s heroine, however, does a good deal of cross-Channel
shuttling as a minstrel and a knight, and there is no reason to think the poem's
author stayed in one place either. The only extant manuscript of the poem
is written in Picard dialect (not Anglo-Norman), and French inheritance
practices, though exhibiting considerable regional variation as well as dif-
ferences from those of England, also show substantial resonance with the
situation in the poem. The process of centralization that Norbert Elias has
called the "monopoly mechanism” peaked somewhat earlier in England than
in France, but on both sides of the English Channel the thirteenth century
was characterized by royal aggrandizement and noble attempts to contain
it.12 French nobles would certainly have been aware of the more restrictive
controls under which their English counterparts had traditionally lived, but
also of Magna Carta and its attempt to limit royal power. So the dramatiza-
tion of inheritance and royal control might play differently on opposite sides
of the English Channel, but it would still play.
In Silence, the heavy royal hand in matters of noble inheritance comes
to the fore when King Evan institutes the law that prevents women from in-
heriting in response to an inheritance dispute involving twin sisters:

.jj. conte esposent les puchieles.
Cho dist cascuns qu'il a 1'ainsnee;
Por quant li uns a la mainsnee. /
Mellee i ot por son avoir,
Car cascuns [violt] la terre avoir.
Li uns le violt par mi partir;
Li altres dist qu'il iert martyr
Et vis recreans en batalle
An^ois qu'il a plain pie i falle. (280-288)
[Two counts married the girls.
Each one claimed to have the older,
but one of the two must have had the younger.
There was a quarrel over the inheritance,
for both of them wanted to have the land.
One wanted to share it equally;
the other said he would be a martyr
and vile coward in battle
before he would yield an inch of it.]
The counts attempt to settle the dispute through trial by combat, but both
are killed in the process. It is as though feudal culture threatens to self-de-
struct when confronted with perfect equality, either in the disposition of
property or on the field of judicial combat. King Evan is so outraged by the
deaths of the two counts that he declares, “no woman shall ever inherit again
/ in the kingdom of England / as long as I reign over the land" ("Ja feme n'iert
mais iretere / Ens el roiame s'Engletiere, / Por tant com j’aie a tenir tiere"
[314-316]).

In something like a twisted version of conjointure, that familiar romance
technique whereby multiple story lines are woven into one harmonious
whole, the case of the two sisters, their count husbands, and King Evan func-
tions as a disjointure in which several dissonant social realities collide in one
romance situation. All the participants have differing interests going into
the dispute; all experience significant losses as a result of it; and the new law
damages the interests of heiresses — such as the poem's heroine — who are
not yet born at the time of its inception. With some modification, Fredric
Jameson's comments on the cultural underpinnings of romance shed light
on the social discord of this episode in Silence:
As for romance, it would seem that its ultimate condition of figura-
tion ... is to be found in a transitional moment in which two distinct
modes of production, or moments of socioeconomic development, co-
exist. Their antagonism is not yet articulated in terms of the struggle
of social classes, so that its resolution can be projected in the form of a
nostalgic (or less often, a Utopian) harmony.13
If we substitute mode of inheritance for mode of production and remember
that the struggle is not a latent one between classes but an overt one within
the aristocratic class, Jameson’s formulation suggests the power of romance
to address the anxieties surrounding a moment of transition. New regula-
tions and shifting practices regarding the division of land among sisters, the
status of heiresses in relation to their husbands and male relatives, and the
role of the king in the inheritances of his greatest vassals were sources of con-
siderable disquiet for thirteenth-century nobles. Silence's struggle to resolve
her inheritance problems is indeed a utopian quest to work out such anxiet-
ies. In the poem’s dramatic denouement, Silence, after maintaining her mas-
culine disguise through many narrow scrapes and high adventures, is finally
revealed by Merlin’s magic to be female. In this idealized romantic outcome,
the king restores Silence’s land to her, repeals the law forbidding female in-
heritance, and marries her himself, thus bringing psychological resolution to
an unresolved social problem.
But before I say more about the poem's idealized ending, the situation
of the twin sisters and their judicially killed husbands needs further con-
textualization. Heldris’s episode of sisterly discord was not the first romantic
treatment of such inheritance difficulties; it is essentially an inside-out ver-
sion of a similar story found a century earlier in the Yvain of Chretien de
Troyes (4704 ff., 5820-6446), and the differences between the two versions
illustrate the shifting status of female heirs during the thirteenth century.
In Chretien’s story, it is the sisters rather than their husbands who quarrel
over the inheritance, and there is no dispute about which sister is older, only
about whether the elder should divide the inheritance with the younger. In
Yvain, the equally matched combat between Yvain and Gawain (the champi-
ons the sisters have chosen) ends when the two friends recognize each other
and — with a courtesy contrasting sharply with the grim determination of
the counts in Silence — each proclaims he has been defeated by the other.
And King Arthur’s intervention could hardly be more opposite to King Evan's:
Arthur proclaims that the younger sister shall have her share. In Chretien's
time, the division of land between sisters could still have been seen as an in-
novative resolution and the king's intervention as a noble gesture that settled
a matter in which he had no personal stake. But by Heldris’s time, as we shall
see, kings took a much more direct interest in the division of land and were
acutely conscious that dividing it among heirs could remove some of it from
royal control.
Silence thus conflates together several issues that would have been at
stake when sisters stood to inherit property. If it were really just a dispute
about which child was the elder, it would have been a problem for twin sons
as much as for twin daughters. Inheritance by daughters, however, was of-
ten considered more partible than inheritance by sons; girls were expected to
share. Not, however, in any straightforward or universally attested fashion,
and especially not in any way that remained constant during the course of
the thirteenth century or on both sides of the English Channel. At the be-
ginning of the century in England there was usually a mix of feudal law and
family obligation in which one daughter inherited the property and did hom-
age for it, but was in turn expected to provide for her sisters. Normally the
heiress would have been chosen by the overlord, and which daughter the lord
chose depended as much on her husband's relationship with that lord as it did
on the heiress's seniority.14 Both the choice of which daughter would inher-
it and how that daughter would provide for her sisters became increasingly
regularized during the course of the thirteenth century, although that regu-
larization proceeded more slowly than did corresponding customs regarding
male inheritance, and a higher degree of uncertainty would have accompanied
any devolution of land in which the heir or heirs were female. Hie expecta-
tion that the lord would choose the eldest daughter gradually became more
fixed, but so did the expectation that the eldest daughter would divide the
inheritance equally with her sisters. In France, the partition of estates among
both male and female heirs had long been more common than in England,
but there were considerable regional variations, and discontinuities between
customary law and practice could easily lead to conflict.15 Despite more var-
ied practices, the makers of French law, like their English counterparts, also
attempted to codify female inheritance customs in a way that kept the main
residence and its associated feudal service with the eldest sister but divided
the land equally. In Champagne, for example, a baronial council of 1212 leg-
islated that when land was divided among sisters, “the eldest daughter would
inherit the castle, but her sisters would share all other assets of the inheri-
tance equally.”16
The increasingly standardized partitioning of land between sisters may
have been a welcome innovation to most thirteenth-century aristocrats, but
from the point of view of the overlord or king, the practice brought with it the
same problems as the older system of parage upon which it was based. Parage
was a partition of land among male heirs wherein the younger brothers did
homage to the eldest for their portions and only the eldest did direct homage
for his portion to the original lord. The practice had been brought to England
by the Normans but abolished in the mid-twelfth century; in France it was a
common practice until expressly forbidden in 1209 by Philip Augustus.17 The
reason for its demise during the tenure of strong central rulers seems clear:
only the eldest brother’s portion was under the direct control of the overlord,
and the revival of the practice as a model for dividing inheritances among fe-
male heirs also reintroduced the diminishment of central control. Depending
on whether one was a lord or a vassal, an elder sister or a younger sister, born
early in the thirteenth century or later, the changes in how land was parti-
tioned among heiresses would have been variously welcome or unwelcome,
and the transitions were neither smooth nor uncontented.
The overdetermined situation of the two counts and the twin sisters in
the Roman de Silence sets a match to this volatile mix. The indistinguish-
ability of the counts as much as the exact parity of the daughters ensures
that there would be a conflict regardless of whether older customs or newer
customs are applied, but the particular nature of the dispute highlights the
emerging inheritance practices of the thirteenth century. One of the counts
claims that the inheritance should be divided equally, suggesting that newer
rules favoring partition apply but then it makes little sense for him to claim
that his wife is the elder daughter and the sole heir. The other count insists
that his wife is the elder sister, a fact that would automatically favor him
only if the newer rules are in effect. In that case, however, there would also
be a formal expectation to divide the property equally, an option he finds
less attractive than dying as a recreant in battle (at least he gets his second
choice). The king finds no reason to favor one count's claim over the other's,
and his extreme reaction to the disastrous duel calls into question the narra-
tor’s earlier claim that he was known to be a king who "upheld justice in his
realm" ("ot justice en sa bailie" [119]). All of the participants in the dispute
seem to find the challenges posed by female inheritance insurmountable,
and the contest over the sisters' land dramatizes the dynamics — and the
anxieties — of a period of transition.
While twin sisters whose husbands kill each other constitutes a roman-
tic exaggeration, sisterly disputes over inheritance certainly happened, and
may even have been relatively frequent.18 On the British side of the English
Channel, the question of dividing land among sisters figured in such promi-
nent cases as the disposition of the earldom of Chester in mid-century and
of the kingdom of Scotland at the end of the thirteenth century.19 In at least
two humbler cases from earlier in the century, a younger sister was placed in a
nunnery by the elder sister and her husband. This might have been considered
an appropriate fulfillment of the family obligation to provide for the non-in-
heriting sister by the sister doing the placing, but in neither case was it consid-
ered so by the sister who was placed. The younger sister in one case managed
to get married surreptitiously, escaped from the nunnery with her new hus-
band, and claimed the right to inherit property along with her sister. After
the new husband cleared himself from abduction charges, the younger couple
began a lengthy litigation with the older couple. In the other case the younger
sister had been placed in the nunnery as a young child and claimed that “she
properly returned to the world when she reached the age of discretion.” She
was excommunicated and had to pursue her right to leave the nunnery in ec-
clesiastical courts before taking up her property case in secular courts. She fi-
nally reached an agreement with her elder sister about twenty-five years after
her first claim.20 Given the alternative of such protracted litigation, settling a
property contest by judicial combat seems almost merciful, but suffice it to
say that the sisterly quarrel in the Roman de Silence, sensationalized though it
is, strays little from the pattern of real thirteenth-century disputes.
King Evan’s abolition of female inheritance in reaction to the deaths of
the two counts pushes royal sovereignty somewhat further than any medi-
eval king could have been confident in achieving. It does, however, drama-
tize the difficulties of a time when inheritance customs were in flux and
when the king of England maintained older, more stringent forms of control
over his chief tenants than those lords could maintain over their tenants,
while the king of France was enjoying the fruits of steadily increasing cen-
tralization. Of the many forms of royal control, perhaps the most relevant
to Silence were the restrictions on alienation, especially as it relates to the di-
vision of land between female heirs. Alienation simply means a transfer of
ownership, but came into use as a conditional gift whereby the grantor could
circumvent primogeniture by deeding land to someone on the condition that
the grantee deed it back to someone the grantor Specified, usually a younger
son or daughter.21 There are two important points about alienation in the
second half of the thirteenth century: first, it was rapidly growing in use
during this period, and second, it was available to the greatest fief-holders
only via an expensive license from the king. In England, Henry III expressly
forbid unlicensed alienation by tenants-in-chief in 1256.22 In France, a royal
ordinance of 1275 established higher tariff rates for alienation of land held
from the king than for alienation of land held from lesser lords.23 Lords who
held land directly from the king thus had the least flexibility of any freeborn
persons in how they could dispose of their property.
The adtions of real thirteenth-century kings make clear why, in the Ro-
man de Silence, King Evan does not attempt to choose one daughter as heir. If
he were to partition the land equally as Chretiens King Arthur does, Evan
would lose direct control over the younger sister's portion since she (or her
husband) would owe feudal service not to the king but to the older sister. On
the other hand, allowing the dispute to proceed to judicial combat also has
risks; a general outbreak of violence after the two counts are killed is only
narrowly avoided (307-308). By entirely doing away with women's ability
to inherit, King Evan appears to be dodging alternatives that are from his
point of view equally unattractive, and his decree would have bothered some
members of Heldris's audience less than others. There were longstanding
complaints in medieval society that female inheritance damaged the social
structure by fragmenting great estates,24 and the variety of opinion is clearly
represented in the poem in the words of those who swear to uphold the king's
decree: "Alquant le font ireement / Et li plusor moult liement, / Qui n'en
donroient une tille” ("Some did it in anger, / but most did it quite gladly — /
the ones who had nothing to lose" [321-326]). But in the real England,
unlike King Evan's, no one did anything to stop women’s ability to inherit,
and for good reason: abolishing female inheritance would have seriously dis-
rupted the functioning of aristocratic society. Between 1200 and 1327,57.3%
of English baronies were inherited by women at least once and 19.5% of all
baronial inheritances during the period went to women.25 The importance
of female inheritance pertained to the situation in France as well as England
and at various levels of the feudal hierarchy. In the County of Champagne,
for example, “women represented over 20 percent of the ordinary fief hold-
ers” during the third quarter of the thirteenth century.26 If over half the bar-
ons in the land owe their holdings to a female ancestor and lesser aristocratic
inheritances owe a similar debt to the maternal line, a huge sector of the
economy would simply disappear into the king's coffers if that king did away
with women’s ability to inherit.
The emphasis on female inheritance seems to be a conscious choice on
Heldris’s part, since, in his literary source from the Arthurian Vulgate, it is
not the cross-dressed maiden but rather her father and brother whose inher-
itance is lost and then restored.27 It is not simply, though, the fact of wide-
spread female inheritance in actual thirteenth-century practice that makes
Evan’s law seem so outrageous, but also the particular function of women's
inheritance in noble society. We have seen that there was not much freedom
in the way the tenants-in-chief could dispose of their property, and if it was
difficult for one noble to grant land to another, then that meant it was also
difficult to become the recipient of someone else’s grant. What little wiggle
room there was derived largely from female inheritance. The loss involved
in the fragmentation of an estate when women inherited was someone else’s
gain, and even when an eState fell to a single heiress it was still someone else’s
gain. Unlike a dowry, which usually reverted to a woman's family if she had
no heirs, and if she did have heirs was likely to be used to provide for daugh-
ters and younger sons, the land an heiress brought with her — fragmented
or not — was permanently added to her husband's patrimony. By preventing
his female subjects from inheriting property, Evan is also depriving his male
subjects of an important and rare means of acquiring land and status.28
Silence turns out to be an only child, thus underscoring the crude
arbitrariness of a law designed to avoid the problems of partible inheritance.
There is, however, the precedent of Silence’s mother Eufemie, who had also
been the only child of the Count of Cornwall. Under ordinary circumstances
Eufemie's father could not make a match for her without the king’s approval,
and if he died before his daughter married, the king would have the right of
wardship, which means he would collect the profits from her land until such
time as he arranged a marriage for her to a man of his choosing. Giving the
daughter and the land with her to a man of his own choosing is exactly what
King Evan does in arranging the marriage of Silence's parents Cador and
Eufemie, except he does so while the Count is still alive and without even
consulting him. The king's adviser who explains the situation to Cador re-
minds him of the inheritance law saying, “the land should have been this
lady's, / but she no longer has a right to it” ("Cesti devroit estre la terre, /
Mais n’i a droit qu'ele puist estre" [1453-1454]), and the loss of the woman's
rights is also a loss of her father’s.29
The abolition of female inheritance in Silence thus exaggerates the already
stringent control a thirteenth-century king had over his barons, especially
over their female children, and Eufemie's situation also resonates with an-
other royal practice. Upon the death of one of his tenants-in-chief the king
automatically took formal possession of the land, granting it back to the heir
only when the heir had paid the relief a kind of inheritance tax. By enforc-
ing this rule the king preserved for himself another right that lesser lords
had long since been forced to give up.30 King Evan's freedom to dispose as he
pleases with the Count of Cornwall’s land and daughter while the Count is
still alive is simply a nightmare version of the prerogatives thirteenth-cen-
tury kings actually had over their chief tenants. For the greatest fief-holders
of thirteenth-century kings, the ability to reprogram the sex of a child must
have seemed almost as attractive — and almost as likely — as any other
mechanism for evading royal control. The fluidity of Silence's gender mirrors
the social reality in which the laws and customs governing female inheri-
tance were less fixed than their masculine counterparts and where heiresses
of great estates offered noblemen the rare opportunity to join the king's mo-
nopoly instead of being excluded from it.
The risk of partitioning estates and the hope of acquiring them were
both possibilities, we have seen, when women stood to inherit property in
late thirteenth-century France and England. King Evan has it both ways:
he forbids female inheritance when the division of an estate between sisters
threatens the loss of royal control over the younger sister’s portion, but he
reinstates it when a single heiress — Silence herself— would bring a great
estate on the market. 'Then he marries that heiress himself, thus asserting
direct and undisputed lordship over her land. This adtion would extinguish
the county of Cornwall as a separate barony upon the death of Cador, fur-
ther centralizing and aggrandizing the king's authority. Our temptation to
read this final scene of the romance in terms of Silence's personal success or
failure in resisting the patriarchy may cause us to forget that Heldris's first
audience was more interested in ascending the patriarchy than resisting it.
Aristocratic anxiety in the face of royal strictures is merely the flip side of
the nobility’s romantic longings for land and status. On the most literal level
Silence overcomes the uncertainties of her upbringing and environment to
attain the highest status possible for a woman of her birth. She does not, of
course, become queen through any ordinary means, and the fact that the
best knight in the land marries the king functions as a fantasy of upward
mobility for those nobles who could not beat the king at the game of prop-
erty politics, but also could not join him as Silence does.

Craig A. Berry
Independent Scholar

1	Sarah Roche-Mahdi, “Introduction,” in Heldris of Cornwall, Silence: A Thirteenth-
Century French Romance, ed. and trans, eadem (East Lansing: Colleagues Press, 1992),
ix-xxiv, here xi n. 2.
2	Regina Psaki, in her edition of the poem, calls it “at least proto-feminist’ (“Intro-
duction," in Heldris de Cornualle, Le Roman de Silence, ed. and trans, eadem [New York:
Garland, 1991], ix-xxxvii, here xxx), and another recent editor suggests that it deals
with "matters that the modern reader might reasonably expect to find expressed so ex-
plicitly ... in French feminist criticism of the 1970s rather than in a medieval romance*
(ed. Roche-Mahdi, xx). Edward J. Gallagher has remarked that the romance has “an
almost uncanny air of modernity about it* (“The Modernity of Le Roman de Silence,’
University of Dayton Review 21.3 [1992]: 31-42, here 39). This is a story, the critics tell
us, about the "politics of gender" (Roberta L. Krueger, Women Readers and the Ideology
of Gender in the Old French Verse Romance [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1993] chap. 4); "the role of performance in gender identification" (Peggy McCracken,
"'The Boy Who Was a Girl': Reading Gender in the Roman de Silence," Romanic Review
85 [1995]: 517-36, here 517); "deconstructed masculinity” (Lorraine K. Stock, "The Impor-
tance of Being Gender 'Stable': Masculinity and Feminine Empowerment in Le Roman
de Silence," Arthuriana 7.2 [1997]: 7-34, here 9); 'sexualized textuality," (Kate Mason
Cooper, "Elie and L: Sexualized Textuality in the Roman de Silence,” Romance Notes 25
[1985]: 341-60); "gender neutrality" (Erin F. Labbie, "The Specular Image of the Gen-
der-Neutral Name: Naming Silence in Le Roman de Silence," Arthuriana 7.2 [1997]:
63-77); "queer identities" (Elizabeth A. Waters, “The Third Path: Alternative Sex, Al-
ternative Gender in Le Roman de Silence," Arthuriana 7.2 [1997]: 35-46, here 38); and
“lesbian desire" (Kathleen M. Blumreich, "Lesbian Desire in the Old French Le Roman
de Silence," Arthuriana 7.2 [1997]: 47-62). It is a “texte dejouissance" (Peter L. Allen,
“The Ambiguity of Silence: Gender, Writing, and Le Roman de Silence," in Sign, Sentence,
Discourse: Language in Medieval Thought and Literature, ed. Julian N. Wasserman and
Lois Roney [Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 1989]: 98-112, here 98) in which the
intertwined ambiguities of gender and language make it a "map of its own misreadings"
(R. Howard Bloch, “Silence and Holes: The Roman de Silence and the Art of the Trou-
vere," Yale French Studies 70 [1986]: 81-99, here 98).
3	The phrase belongs to Sharon Kinoshita, who wisely observes, "any attempt to
gauge the political significance of Silence without taking into consideration the social
institutions and practices by which feudal society reproduced itself is at best partial and
at worst misleading": "Heldris de Cornualle's Roman de Silence and the Feudal Politics
of Lineage," PMLA 110 (1995): 397-409, here 397). Kinoshita has recently extended
this work in “Male-Order Brides: Marriage, Patriarchy, and Monarchy in the Roman de
Silence," Arthuriana 12.1 (2002): 64-75.
4	Until recently the social dimension of the poem was seldom viewed as centrally im-
portant to its meaning, noteworthy exceptions being Simon Gaunt, "The Significance
of Silence," Paragraph 13 (1990): 202-16, who suggests, "Heldris's praise of Silence re-
inforces class hierarchies rather than breaking down gender stereotypes' (212); and
Kinoshita, "Feudal Politics." Recent work emphasizing the importance of genealogy,
property, and class includes: Kinoshita, "Male-Order Brides"; Peggy McCracken, The
Romance of Adultery: Queenship and Sexual Transgression in Old French Literature (Phila-
delphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1998), who notes that Silence is 'a figure who
seems to subordinate erotic desire to a desire for property and proper succession** (148);
and Robert S. Sturges, "The Crossdresser and the Juventus: Category Crisis in Silence,’
Arthuriana 12.1 (2002): 37-49.
5	On the tendency of thirteenth-century historical writing to fashion itself after
romance, see Gabrielle M. Spiegel, Romancing the Past: Tie Rise of Vernacular Prose Histori-
ography in Thirteenth-Century France (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California
Press, 1993); and eadem, The Past as Text: Tie Tieory and Practice of Medieval Historiogra-
phy (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997), esp. chaps. 10-11.
6	Spiegel, in both of the works already cited, addresses in detail the purposes and
forms of thirteenth-century writing about the past. On the adoption ofhistoriographical
concerns into romance, see Lee Patterson, "The Romance of History and the Alliterative
Mort Arthure," in idem, Negotiating the PaSt: TieHistorical Understanding of Medieval Lit-
erature (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1987), 197-230.
7	McCracken, "The Boy Who Was a Giri*,’ 530; Barbara Newman, From Virile
Woman to WomanChrist: Studies in Medieval Religion and Literature (Philadelphia: Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania Press, 1995), 165; and eadem, God and the Goddesses: Vision,
Poetry, and Belief in the Middle Ages (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press,
2003), 122-34.
8	Quotations are from Silence, ed. and trans. Roche-Mahdi. Subsequent citations
appear in the text.
9	Northrop Frye, Anatomy of Criticism (New York: Atheneum, 1967), 192.
10	See Georges Duby, ‘"Women and Power,* in Cultures of Power: Lordship, Status,
and Process in Twelfth-Century Europe, ed. Thomas N. Bisson (Philadelphia, University
of Pennsylvania Press, 1995), 69-85. Duby notes that when a woman stood to inherit a
lordship, 'if she chanced to be an orphan without a brother, then the husband gathered
up with her the power of which she was the legitimate holder* (71).
11	Lynne Dahmen, “Heldris’ Use of Insular Materials in the Roman de Silence,"
paper at the International Congress on Medieval Studies, Kalamazoo, MI, 5 May 2000.
I am indebted to Professor Dahmen for providing me with a copy of this unpublished
paper. As Dahmen notes, much of Susan Crane's work on insular romances is helpful in
articulating the intersection of history and romance in Silence; see esp. chap. 2, "Land,
Lineage, and Nation,” in S. Crane, Insular Romance: Politics, Faith and Culture in Anglo-
Norman and Middle English Literature (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986),
53-91.
12	Norbert Elias, Ute Civilizing Process: Sociogenetic and Psychogenetic Investigations,
trans. EdmundJephcott (Oxford: Blackwell, 2000), 263-64,266-67,268 ff. On the rapid
increase of the royal monopoly in France under Philip Augustus, see Jean Dunbabin,
France in the Making 843-1180 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985), 371-73; John
W. Baldwin, Ute Government of Philip Augustus: Foundations of French Royal Power in the
Middle Ages (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986).
13	Fredric Jameson, The Political Unconscious: Narrative as Socially Symbolic Act
(Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1981), 148.
14	S. F. C. Milsom, “Inheritance by Women in the Twelfth and Early Thirteenth
Centuries,” in On the Laws and Customs of England: Essays in Honor of Samuel E. Thorne,
ed. Morris S. Arnold et al. (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1981),
60-89, here 66.
15	Malcom Vale, The Angevin Legacy and the Hundred Years War 1250-1340 (Ox-
ford: Blackwell, 1990), 82,101-2.
16	Theodore Evergates, ed. and trans., Feudal Society in Medieval France: Documents
from the County of Champagne (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1993), 51.
17	On parage and its abolition see Baldwin, The Government of Philip Augustus, 262-
63; Marc Bloch, Feudal Society, trans. L. A. Manyon (1961; repr. London: Routledge,
1989), 205,208; Ch. Petit-Dutaillis, The Feudal Monarchy in France and England, trans.
E. D. Hunt (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1936), 303. On later female inheritance
practices derived from parage, see Evergates, Documents from the County of Champagne,
49-54; J. C. Holt, “Politics and Property in Early Medieval England,” in Landlords, Peas-
ants, and Politics in Medieval England, ed. T. H. Aston (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1987), 65-114, here 107; Scott L. Waugh, “Women’s Inheritance and the
Growth of Bureaucratic Monarchy in Twelfth- and Thirteenth-Century England,*
Nottingham Medieval Studies 34 (1990): 71-92, here 74-75.
18	Milsom, "Inheritance by Women,' 80. Nor does the environment on the Conti-
nent appear to have been less litigious. Baldwin, in a survey of exchequer cases heard at
Falaise and Caen between 1207 and 1223, sums up, 'in matters of inheritance and land
possession, over half of the litigants were disadvantaged women and minors' (The Gov-
ernment of Philip Augustus, 229).
19	R. Stewart-Brown, "Ihe End of the Norman Earldom of Chester,' English Histor-
ical Review 35 (1920): 26-53, here 46-47. In Silence, Chester is the location of the fate-
ful trial between the two counts married to the twin sisters (293), and also the location
of the rebellion in which Silence turns the tide in favor of King Evan (5287 ff.). On the
fates of the real and fictional counties of Chester as exemplars of increasing royal con-
trol, see Kinoshita, “Male-Order Brides,' 67-69.
20 Milsom, “Inheritance by Women,” 80.
21 For a clear introduction to such forms of alienation as entail, use, and enjointure,
see Chris Given-Wilson, Hie English Nobility in the Late Middle Ages (London: Routledge,
1987), 137 ff.
22	Susan Reynolds, Fiefs and Vassals: Hie Medieval Evidence Reinterpreted (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1994), 382; Scott L. Waugh, 'Non-Alienation Clauses in Thirteenth-
Century English Charters," Albion 17 (1985): 1-14, here 12.
23	Reynolds, Fiefs, 303.
24	On problems associated with dividing fiefs, see Bloch, Feudal Society, 203; Theo-
dore Evergates, Feudal Society in the Bailliage of Troyes under the Counts of Champagne,
1152-1284 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1975), 126; Scott L. Waugh, The
Lordship of England: Royal Wardships and Marriages in English Society and Politics 1217-
1327 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1988), 52.
25	Waugh, Lordship, 19.
26	Evergates, Feudal Society in the Bailliage of Troyes, 130.
27	For the story of Avenable/Grisandole, see Rupert T. Pickens, trans., The Story
of Merlin, in Lancelot-Grail: The Arthurian Vulgate and Post-Vulgate in Translation, ed.
Norris J. Lacy, 5 vols. (New York: Garland, 1993), 1:323-29.
28	See Waugh, Lordship, 21-24 on the redistribution of wealth among the aristoc-
racy through the combined effects of marriage and inheritance.
29	As Kinoshita observes, 'the king usurps the father's familial authority* ('Feudal
Politics,” 401), but I would like to emphasize that such usurpation is already implicit in
the abolition of female inheritance.
30	S. F. C. Milsom, The Legal Framework of English Feudalism (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1976), 163.