5
THE AMBIGUITY OF SILENCE
Gender, Writing, and Le Roman de Silence
PETER L. ALLEN

Texte deplaisir (text of pleasure): one that contents, fills, gives euphoria;
one that comes from the culture, does not break with it, is tied to a
comfortable practice of reading.
Texte de jouissance (text of sexual enjoyment): one that brings about a
state of loss, one that causes discomfort (even a certain annoyance),
shakes the historical, cultural, psychological bases of the reader, the
consistency of his tastes, his values, his memories, causes a crisis in his
relationship with language.1
J-Jc eldris de Comualle’s thirteenth-century Le Roman de Silence is a
texte de jouissance, a text that raises questions of sex and language by
disconcerting its readers. Relatively new to the medievalist public, it
confronts some of the major critical issues currently facing medieval
studies. In studying it, we are forced to think about the claims of
feminist criticism, the relationship between sexuality and literature,
the role (and limitations) of the textual editor, the nature of the
medieval “canon” of texts, and the modern reader’s relationship with
older literature. This paper will attempt to confront these issues
through a discussion of the poem: by being forced to admit the
inadequacy of our methods of understanding medieval writing, we
will see what new possibilities of reading the text can offer us.
Heldris’s poem, on the surface, seems unlikely to threaten anyone’s
notions of what medieval literature is all about. The text was appar-
ently not particularly popular in the Middle Ages, since we have only
one manuscript copy and the author is otherwise unknown. Even the
modem (1972) edition is out of print,2 and it is only quite recently
that studies of the poem have begun to appear.3 Furthermore, the text
does not appear to challenge our ways of thinking: it does not
explicitly call upon the support of such “serious” disciplines as phi-
losophy, theology, or politics. The absence of such “critical” prob-
lems is, however, in the eye of the beholder. In fact, the more closely
one looks, the more ambiguities one is likely to find. The title, whether
in Old French or modern English, is confusing: how can silence
provoke a poem, let alone a romance? The manuscript, Mi.LM.6 in
the library of the University of Nottingham, contains a number of
odd features that seem intimately related to the peculiarities of the
text. And Lewis Thorpe’s editorial commentary, which seems to
present all the help a reader might wish or expect, is in fact riddled
with hypotheses and frustrations. These problems do not so much
make Le Roman de Silence unique as remind us of the special consid-
eration medieval literature asks of us, its modem readers. Our models
of reading attempt to elucidate, pin down, and disambiguate medie-
val texts; Le Roman de Silence quietly, stubbornly, refuses to make
itself accessible to this kind of approach. We cannot remove the
ambiguities from the romance without breaking its silence—without
destroying the object we want to study. Silence, in fact, refuses to
permit itself to be studied as an “object.” If we wish to read it, we are
obliged instead to make it the subject of our study: the text itself—
both as a poem and as a manuscript—tells us how to read. It informs
us when it will permit its meaning to be elucidated and when it will
not.4 This kind of reading can be frustrating, if we use models
through which we attempt to master the text. If, however, we can
open ourselves up to the text and accept its ambiguities, the text will
free us to understand it better and to take pleasure in our readerly
role.
Since Le Roman de Silence is relatively unfamiliar, it will be useful to
begin this discussion with a summary of the plot.5 Because of a
quarrel between two counts, King Ebain of England decrees that no
woman shall inherit property during his reign. Ebain marries one of
his retainers, Cador, to the daughter of the Count of Cornwall,
Eufemie (whose name recalls that of Ebain’s queen, Eufeme). When
the Count dies, Cador accedes to his position, and, when the couple
gives birth to a daughter, the question of inheritance arises. The
parents decide to conceal the child’s sex by naming her Silence,
reasoning that if she ever realizes that she is female, “Silentiiis” can
always be changed to “Silentid.” Silence is brought up as a boy, but
when she reaches the age of puberty Nature and Nurture debate over
her gender. She runs away from home with a troupe of jongleurs; her
father, overcome with grief, kills all jongleurs who come to Corn-
wall. Silence, meanwhile, has mastered the art of poetry even better
than her masters, who threaten to kill her. She returns to Cornwall
and escapes death there because she is recognized as the count’s “son.”
Queen Eufeme, ignorant of Silence’s sex, tries to seduce him (her),
and, when Silence refuses, claims to have been his (her) victim. King
Ebain exiles Silence to France; Eufeme substitutes for Ebain’s laissez-
passer a letter asking the King of France to execute the bearer; the
fraud is revealed; and Silence is recalled. Eufeme repeats her accusa-
tion, and Ebain assigns Silence the penitential task of finding Mer-
lin—a task only a woman can accomplish. Silence, of course,
succeeds, and brings Merlin back to court, where he reveals such
secrets as the heroine’s true gender and the fact that Eufeme has a
lover she disguises as a nun. Eufeme is executed; Silence is established
as a woman; and Ebain makes her his queen.
A number of the romance’s ambiguities emerge from this sum-
mary: the almost identical names of Silence’s mother and her prede-
cessor in Ebain’s nuptial bed (i.e., the queen); the fact that both these
names, unlike that of the heroine, valorize speech; the heroine’s
gender (and the Latin and French names that are used both to conceal
and to reveal it to various “readers”—Silence herself, the king, our-
selves); the presence of poets and poetry within the poem itself and
their relationship to a poet (Silence) whose name implies the absence
of all sound and, hence, poetry. The indeterminacies of this romance
are not limited to details of plot, however, and it is best to begin our
discussion at the beginning—namely, with an examination of the
manuscript and the edition. What we find there will provide a fruitful
introduction to the poem itself.
Manuscript as Sign: The Context of Silence
The manuscript that contains the unique copy of Silence also con-
tains an interesting miscellancy of other literary works, including
Benoit de Sainte Maure’s Roman de Troie, Raoul de Houdenc’s La
Vengeance Radiguel, and ten fabliaux. It has, as Thorpe puts it, “been
roughly used” (p. 1), and, as the binding weakens, the codex is in the
process of separating into quires. Indeed, the condition of the manu-
script makes it difficult for the reader to know which of the Not-
tingham University Library’s Search Room Regulations to follow:
#3, which states, “Whenever possible bound volumes should be read
using a bookrest,” or #5, “The arrangement of loose papers in a
bundle should not be altered.” MS. Mi.LM.6 totters between order
and disorder, and the blue cord that ties it can only retard the speed at
which this artifact of the Middle Ages obeys the law of entropy. Its
content, too, seems in doubt. The case in which the manuscript is
kept bears the inscription “‘Le Roman de Troie,’ etc.—Benoit de
Sainte Maure,” giving priority to the larger, more widely recognized
works with which the manuscript begins; the fabliaux, which bear
such intriguing titles as “D[ou] prestre ki perdi les colles” (“The Priest
Who Lost His Balls”), are, however, ignored. Yet the large majority of
those moderns who have edited the better-known romances were
unaware that this copy existed (compare pp. 3—4), whereas the manu-
script has been consulted by those editing the less canonical, more
sexually explicit, fabliaux.
Yet even the fabliaux here are mutilated. “D[ou] prestre ki perdi les
colles” is cut short, missing over two hundred of its 314 lines (com-
pare p. 3 n.4). The last text in the manuscript, which is identified as
Marie de France’s “De la cugnie” (The Axe), stops after fifteen lines.
But the strangest example is an anonymous fabliau that has no title in
this copy but which is normally called “De la dame escolliee” (The
Castrated Lady).6 In this story a rebellious woman is cut open and
two bull’s testicles are produced by sleight of hand to show that her
insubordination was due to inappropriate masculine characteristics:
“Que ce sachiez, par ces grenotes / Sont les femes fieres et sotes”
(“Know this: by these seeds / Women become proud and foolish”).7
The moral is that women must be kept in their place and must respect
their rightful masters; “Dahet feme qui despit home!” (“Cursed be the
woman who despises a man!”).8 This moralizing, however, ignores
the fact that the fabliau’s violence is completely unjustified: women
cannot be “escolliees” because they have no “coilles" (balls). The
dictionaries, of course, recognize this fact of physiology: they find no
other occurrence of “escolliee” in the feminine. The extraordinary
antifeminism of this fabliau is echoed in Le Roman de Silence. There
Queen Eufeme is executed for expressing her sexual desire—a desire
that makes her (like the classic queen of romance, Guenevere) not
only an adultress but a traitress, too, since her husband is the head of
state. The outspoken woman is replaced by Silence, who gives up the
male role (the bull’s testicles) that had been attributed to her but was
never truly hers. The manuscript reveals the violence men perpetrate
on women, the source of whose sexual identity the fictions’ men seem
unable to understand.
The oddities of this manuscript are not limited to the literary
works that form a context for Le Roman de Silence. Fourteen illumina-
tions illustrate the story of Silence, but they, too, leave room for
doubt. Of those that seem to be illustrations of the text, two now
have little gaps: the picture of Merlin has no face, 9 while that of
Silence, without her clothes at the point in the story when her true
gender is revealed, bears no features that distinguish the body as
female.10 Furthermore, a series of illuminations which continues
throughout the manuscript seems to have no relation to any of the
stories. These are representations of animals and of mythical, half-
human beasts that seem to be present only to remind us that the texts
belong to the domain of fantasy.11 Moreover, all the illuminations
replace initials in the text and force the adjacent lines of poetry to be
written as two half-lines: image and word thus compete for the
reader’s attention.
To transform the text from its unruly manuscript state into an
accessible, socialized, printed work is the job of the editor. Lewis
Thorpe’s work on Silence covers all the details that one could ask for
from an editor of a medieval text: Thorpe provides a summary of the
story, historical research, an introduction to the language, running
titles, an index of proper names and place names, and a glossary.
Despite all these efforts to make Le Roman de Silence a comfortable
texte de plaisir, however, the poem rejects, or, more precisely, under-
mines the editor’s work: it demands our jouissance if we wish to read it
at all. Thorpe’s wrestling with Silence illustrates the difficulties any
editor must face in attempting to move a medieval text from one
medium to another.
Medieval text production accepted many ambiguities which twen-
tieth-century editing does not. Modern conventions about language,
for example, require consistency in spelling and permit the use of
abbreviations only in a prescribed and limited number of cases. The
scribe of MS. Mi.LM.6, on the other hand, represents nasalizing
consonants indifferently by a tilde, m, or n. Thorpe writes that the
scribe “hesitates” between these choices (p. 235), but in fact, un-
disturbed by any need for consistency, the scribe blithely ignores the
idea that different spellings matter: it is the editor who hesitates. The
modem editor also finds that the text inhibits his (and our) attempts
to separate author from scribe. Thorpe’s attempts to distinguish
jrancien forms from those that are picard are preceded by a caveat: “As
is true of so many other poems of the French Middle Ages, so here it
is only with the greatest difficulty that the language of the poet can be
distinguished from that of the scribe” (p. 56). The radical distinction
we modems make between the inventor and the transmitter of texts
is, for this manuscript, not a concern.
There is nothing unique about this conflation of dialects, of course,
but—as with so many other features of Le Roman de Silence—it seems
to echo the romance’s refusal to behave according to our expectations,
to fit into our categories. Distinctions between history and fiction,
proper nouns and common ones, even text and absence are unsure:
the editor must assume that a hole in the parchment is to be filled by
ne (p. 236 n.1333), and the scribe changes “da Norwege” (“from
Norway”) into the meaningless “danor wege”: the place we know as
“Norway” was nothing but a linguistic fantasy to the copyist (p. 235
n.146). Moreover, our attempts to relate the characters to anything
we recognize as history are fruitless (p. 26). Even the author, Heldris
de Corniialle, is named nowhere but in his poem, and the description
Thorpe proposes is shadowy at best:
If what I have written is accepted, then Heldris is established as a
professional lay poet of the second half of the thirteenth century, who
lived in all probability near to the present-day frontier between France
and Belgium where Nord marches with Hainaut, but who had some
connexion yet to be determined cither with the Duchy of Cornwall or
with Comuaille or with the hamlet La Comualle and who at the same
time had some reason for featuring Chateau-Landon and Beaumont-
en-Gatinais in his poem. (p. 17)
Not only are Heldris’s relations with the external world multiple and
ambiguous, but he, like his poem, exists on the borders, between
France and Belgium, between fiction and history.
Not only are we unable to distinguish between author and scribe
and between historical characters and fictional ones, but we cannot
even learn the history of the text as physical object from the inscrip-
tions we can read in it. These notes, presumably made by the vol-
ume’s owners, are inconclusive:
F 244r, which is otherwise blank, has in the left-hand upper comer a
scribbled note in what appears to be a northern French hand of the
fourteenth century: le ior de mardi I por donpere. ... It is ironic that we
know the day in the week when something was to happen at Dom-
pierre-du-Chemin, but not the month or year, or, indeed, what the
event was! (p. 11)
By this point it is, no doubt, manifest that any attempt to relate Le
Roman de Silence to the world outside its fiction is unlikely to succeed.
Even our attempts to enter the text on strictly literary terms may be
stymied if they try (consciously or not) to simplify the poem. Thus
the running titles provided by the editor to guide the reader reduce
Silence to a single gender (e.g. “Silence Considers Her Situation,” p.
135), whereas the poet reserves the ungrammatical and unnatural but
fictionally accurate privilege of calling his hero(ine) “le vallet ki ert
meschine” (the youth who was a maiden [line 3704 and passim]).12
Elsewhere the titles flirt with absurdity, as when they announce
“Silence Has Great Success as a Minstrel” (p. 143) or “Cador Prepares
to Execute Silence” (p. 153). These signposts are more likely to trip
the reader up than to point him or her in the right direction: the poem
refuses to be reduced to a single meaning.
Silence as Sign: The Limits of Language
That so much ambiguity should accrete around this text is not, I
believe, entirely coincidental. It seems rather that the circumstances
under which we meet the poem actually reflect the fundamental
cracks and strains present in the romance itself—cracks and strains
that affect the very materials out of which this piece of literature is
constructed, namely words and gender. For writing about silence is
an oxymoron, and the poem exists only because language exists at a
second degree from the things it represents: if we had no word that
meant “silence,” we could not use the lack of a word to name a
character. As it is, the titles of MS. Mi.LM.6 strain our means of
communication; to add "Le Roman de” to “[De la dame
escolliee]” would be too much—or not enough—for us to under-
stand. Ambiguity promotes paradox, and it is within this gap, be-
tween language and meaning, between history and fiction, that this
text exists.
Even writing, the means by which the romance is transmitted to
us, is called into question on numerous occasions within the poem.
The word cartre (paper) is used as a homophonic rhyme with cartre
(prison) (lines 4959-60), and the word gloze is twisted in two different
directions: rhyming twice with forms of ozer (to dare), it seems to
mean once “jealous” (a form of jalos/gelos not otherwise recorded),
and once “to dispute” (an extension of the more common “to crit-
icize, ” itself an extension of “to gloss”). The greatest perversion of
writing in the poem is Queen Eufeme’s substitution of letters: for the
letter from the king asking that Silence be welcomed at the French
court, she exchanges one asking that the bearer be executed.13 The
Queen, however, knows that any definite charge is subject to dis-
proof, so she uses a silent accusation to silence Silence:
De par roi Ebayn, son scgnor,
Escrist al roi de France un brief
Qu’il toile al message le cief
Qui les letres a lui enporte;
Que il por rien ne 1’en deporte,
Car il a fait al roi tel honte
Qu’il ne le violt pas metre en conte.
(lines 4320-26)
(On behalf of Ebain, her lord, she writes the king of France a letter
[saying] that he should cut off the head of the messenger who carries
the letter to him; that he not spare him this for any reason, since he has
caused such shame to the king that he does not want to recount it.)
[S]he who lives by the sword shall die by the sword, however, and
Eufeme’s accusation returns to persecute its maker: the count of
Clermont advises the French king that he should not punish anyone
whose crime he does not know, and eventually, as the plot is un-
tangled, it is Eufeme who is executed—poetic justice for her abuse of
writing.
Another key point in the romance’s treatment of language is its
discussions of the heroine’s name, which is more a placeholder for a
name than a real proper noun. Within this name, which seems to
mean nothing, is contained Silence’s whole story: it could be trans-
lated as “a-woman-whose-parents-had-to-give-her-a-name-that-
doesn’t-reveal-her-gender-because-the-king-had-forbidden-women-
to-inherit-property-because-etc.-etc.” This name, empty of signifi-
cance but full of meaning, is the subject of much linguistic play. When
the child is born, everybody gathers in the palace hall, wanting to
know whether it is male or female. The child’s aunt, who has been
enlisted to keep its gender a secret, announces “Ma dame n’a mestier
de noise!’” (“My lady has no need of noise!” [line 1998]). This
announcement is a riddle that conceals its own answer, since the
opposite of noise (in Old French or modem English) is silence. The
French name the child’s parents choose for her masks with the gen-
derless desinence -e the choice they would have been forced to make
in Latin: “Silence” is a nominal zero, a placeholder for a name.
“Scl faisons apiclcr Scilcnsc
El non de Sainte Paciense,
Por cho que silenscc tolt anse.14
Que Jhesus Cris par sa poissance
Le nos doinst celer ct taisir,
Ensi com lui est a plaizir!
Mellor consel trover n’i puis.
Il iert nomes Scilenscius;
Et s’il avient par aventure
Al descovrir de sa nature
Nos muerons cest -us en -a,
S’avra a non Scilencia.
Se nos li tolons dont cest -us
Nos li donrons natural us.
Car cis -us est contrc nature,
Mais 1’altrcs scroit par nature.”
(lines 2067-82)
(“So let us have her called ‘Silence,’ in the name of Saint Patience,
because silence relieves all anxiety. May Jesus Christ by his power
permit us to conceal it and keep it quiet! I can find no better plan. He
will be named Silcntius; and if it should happen that her nature is
discovered, we will change the “-us” into an “-a”, so she will have the
name Silentia. So if we take this “-us” away from her, we will give her
her natural usage, since this “-us” is against nature, but the other one
would be natural.”)
Silence’s gender depends, then, not on nature but on custom or usage
(us). When she reaches puberty, Nature and Nurture debate the issue,
but reach no resolution; and when Silence escapes with the jongleurs,
she takes a pseudonym (Malduit) which, like her real name, reveals
the confusion in which she finds herself: “Car il [i.e., Silence] se tient
moult por mal duit, I Moult mal apris lone sa nature” (For he [i.e.,
Silence] considers himself very badly taught, very badly instructed as
to his nature [lines 3178-79]).
Names in this poem are not revealing: they hold back information,
rather than expose it. Identity is hidden, or absent, or subject ex-
clusively to the convenience of the text: one character’s name, in fact,
seems to have been invented simply to form a rhyme.15 Queen
Eufeme, whose name suggests that speech is positive, uses language
for treacherous purposes and is finally silenced by death. Silence, too,
is named to hide her identity, to conform to King Ebain’s privileging
of male over female. This submission of identity to convenience is an
extreme statement of the “conventionalist” theory of naming, formu-
lated early in Western literary tradition by Plato’s character Her-
mogenes:
“Whatever anyone calls anything, that is its correct name: and if one
changes it for another, and abandons the former name, the new one is
no less correct than the old—just as when we change the names of our
slaves. For nothing has its name by nature, but only by usage and
custom.”16
The relationship of usage and custom to language is precisely what
is at issue in Silence. Silence, by means of an evasive name, must try to
escape the sentences of death and disinheritance which are laid down
for her, but all her efforts to escape from the system only reveal her
inability to do so. When she becomes a jongleur, she escapes silence,
but nearly becomes the victim of her teachers when she surpasses
them. All poets are banned from her native land, but nonetheless she
returns. Her femaleness, which her parents attempt to cover up with
language, is eventually reimposed on her by stripping away the male
appendages (her clothes, the “-us” of her name) she had assumed.
This reversion to femininity, however, means a new submission to the
king’s power—this time not legislative but sexual. King and parents
exercise the power of the masters, the Cratylistic power to endow
people with names, and to determine their destiny by speech. In fact,
King Ebain explicitly exalts the ideal of the Silent Woman (often
portrayed, of course, as a woman who has been decapitated):
“Sens de feme gist en taisir.
Si m’ait Dex, si com jo pens,
Uns muials puct contcr lor sens,
Car femes n’ont sens quo mais un,
C’est taisirs.”
(lines 6399-6403)
(“Woman’s sense lies in being silent. So help me God, I think that a
mute could recount all their sense, since women have only one sense,
namely, being silent.”)
Masculine speech is power; feminine speech (symbolized by Queen
Eufeme) is ripped apart, condemned to death (lines 6651—57).17 All
the male characters the poem can imagine applaud the death of female
speech and the feminization and coronation of Silence:18
Nus horn qui fust nc plainst Eufcmc.
Silence atornent come feme.
Scgnor, que vos diroie plus?
Ains ot a non Scilensius:
Ostes est -us, mis i est -a,
Si est nomes Scilentia.
(lines 6663-68)
(No man alive lamented Eufeme. They dress Silence up as a woman.
Lords, what should I tell you? Before, her name was Silcntius: the
“-us” is removed, an “-a” attached, and he is named Silentia.)
This removal of -us is reminiscent of nothing so much as the fictitious
castration of the “(Dame escoilliee]” of the fabliau: neither she nor
Silence ever really had any testicles, yet it is essential to the men in
their stories to “castrate” them.
That we should find Heldris performing surgery on suffixes is
hardly surprising in this text, where a disintegrating manuscript
encloses poems without titles and eunuch fabliaux. Confusion about
names and genders, however, is only a subset of the most important
ambiguity Le Roman de Silence confronts—that of language and uni-
valent discourse. Early in the romance the author admits that his
efforts towards artistry must at times distance his work from that
which he considers “true,” but suggests that this distance, while
impermissible in Latin, is acceptable in Romans.
Comcnce chi tcls aventure
C'ainques n’oistes tele cn livre.
Qu’cn latin cscrite lizons,
En romans si le vos disons.
Jo ne di pas que n’i ajoigne
Avoic le voir sovcnt mcnqoignc
Por 1c contc miols accsmer:
Mais se jcl puis a droit csmcr
N’i netrai ricn qui m’ucvre enpirc
Nc del voir ncn icrt mos a dire
Car la verte nc doi taisir.
(lines 1658-69)”
(Here begins an adventure such as you’ve never heard of in a book.
That which we read written in Latin we will tell to you in Romans. I do
not say that I do not often add lies to the truth in order to adorn the
story: but if I can rightly judge, I will not put into it anything that will
make my work worse, nor shall there be less of the truth to tell, since I
should not keep the truth silent.)
Walter Ong and Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar have called Latin the
“masculine” discourse of the Middle Ages and the vernacular lan-
guages the period’s “feminine” mode of communication.20 In this
case, however, Romans is not so much a feminine language as a
language that avoids definitions of gender. Thus the significant dis-
tinction between “Silentins” and “Silentia” (which the heroine’s par-
ents used to paper over the cracks in their daughter’s identity [lines
2067—82] and which is reversed when Silence becomes queen) pertains
only to Latin, the language Heldris and his audience read (lisons); it is
irrelevant to Romans, the language they speak (disons). Romans does
not feminize communication: it simply tolerates certain ambiguities
about gender that Latin does not. This is why Heldris uses it in
composing his roman, a fiction that is all about ambiguity: Latin
makes a useful source, but doesn’t entertain. This association of the
ambiguities of vernacular language with fiction recalls Jean Bodel’s
statement that “li conte de Bretaigne sont si vain et plaisant” (“the
tales of Brittany are so meaningless, so pleasant”),21 and Dante’s
“ambages pulcherrime Arturi regis” (“most beautiful ambiguities of
Arthur the king”).22
The ambiguity, the emptiness of the text: in these lacks lies the
importance of Le Roman de Silence. The gaps in the work are what
draw us to it: as Barthes enquires, “L’endroit le plus erotique d’un
corps n’est-il pas la ou le vetement bailie?” (“Isn’t the most erotic part
of a body the place where the clothing parts?”).23 Silence is a text that
refuses our violence but welcomes our jonissance. Its refusal can be
read in various ways—as a characteristic of female writing (writing
about women, if not by them) unwilling to accommodate itself to
male readings; as a Marxist text refusing to accept capitalist modes of
textual diffusion; as a medieval “other” that will not bow to modern
assumptions; as a Freudian polymorphous perversity that our catego-
ries of thought about sex and gender cannot encompass, etc., all
depending on our critical assumptions. These refusals share a com-
mon basis: they insist on the text’s right to remain silent, to hold its
ambiguity. To remove ambiguity from this text means to tear it, to
falsify it, to lose its essence. Yet we can read the poem and enjoy it if
we permit it, at the same time, to read us—to question the assump-
tions with which we teachers, students, readers, editors approach
medieval literature. This literature cannot be forced to give up its
secrets, if only for the reason that so many of these secrets are
ambiguities or silences. We cannot recreate the historical context of
the poem; all we can find is a Tuesday in a week and a year which can
never be known. We cannot effectively summarize, we cannot com-
pletely translate. We cannot, in short, make our reading “comfort-
able”; we cannot subject the text to ourselves. Yet we can, and
perhaps must, read and be read, enter into the world of Romans, of the
roman, and see what we can experience of mute -e in the gap between
-us and -a, in the ambiguity of silence.

Notes
1.	“Tcxtc de plaisir: cclui qui contcntc, emplit, donne de l’cuphoric; cclui qui vient
de la culture, nc rompt pas avcc cllc, est lie a unc pratique confortable de la lecture.
Tcxtc de jouissancc: cclui qui met cn etat de perte, cclui qui dcconfortc (pcut-ctrc
jusqu’a un certain ennui), fait vacillcr les assises historiques, culturcllcs, psychologi-
ques, du lectcur, la consistancc de scs gouts, de scs valcurs, ct de scs souvenirs, met cn
crisc son rapport au langage,” Roland Barthes, Le Plaisir du texte (Paris: Les Editions
du Scuil, 1973), pp. 25-26. This translation and all others in the essay arc my own.
2.	Paradoxically, however, it is not unavailable: as of this writing the publisher still
has a few copies on its shelf: Hcldris de Comuallc, Le Roman de Silence, cd. Lewis
Thorpe (Cambridge: W. Hcffcr & Sons, Ltd., 1972). All references to this edition will
be given in the text: those to the romance itself will be given by line numbers, those to
the editorial material by page number.
3.	Articles on the poem arc beginning to appear. Sec Kate M. Cooper, “Elie and
L: Sexualized Tcxtuality in Le Roman de Silence" and Michele Perret, “Travesties ct
transsexucllcs: Ydcs, Silence, Grisandole, Blanchandinc,” both in Romance Notes 25, 3
(Spring, 1985) and R. Howard Bloch, “Silence and Holes: The Roman de Silence and
the Art of the Trouvcre,” Yale French Studies 70 (1986). I am indebted to Bloch’s article
for a number of ideas.
4.	Barthes, Le Plaisir du texte: “Le texte cst un objet fetiche ct cc fetiche me desire”
(p. 45). On the text's autonomy, compare also Robert S. Sturges, “Interpretation as
Action: the Reader in Late Medieval Narrative,” DAI 40 (1980): 5856A.
5.	This summary is a reduction of that on pages 17—22 of Thorpe’s edition.
6.	“De la dame cscollicc,” in Anatole de Montaiglon and Gaston Raynaud, cds.,
Recueil general et complet des fabliaux des XIIIc et XlVe siecles (1890; reprint, New York:
Burt Franklin [n.d.]), vol. 6, pp. 95-116.
7.	“De la dame,” vv. 602-3.
8.	“De la dame,” v. 618.
9.	University of Nottingham MS. Mi.LM.6, fol. 221.
10.	MS. Mi.LM.6, fol. 222v.
11.	These figures occur on fols. 14v, 55v, 92v, 158v, 213, 217, 218v, 227, 232v, 239,
269, and 328. Fol. 157 contains the beginning of Gautier d'Arras's Ille et Galeron and an
illumination of a ram bearing a staff with a cross and a flag. Thorpe suggests that the
illuminations of animals are by a different hand from those illustrating the Roman de
Silence (p. 6).
12.	Questions of nature and gender abound in the romance, for the characters as
well as for the readers. When Silence rejects Queen Eufemc's advances, the queen
infers by this sign that the hero(inc) must be a (male) homosexual: “Certes, gel croi
bien a critc / Quant jo li mostrai mes costcs, I Que il me dist, *Por Dcu, ostes!’ / Ene
fu cho moult bone ensaigne / Qu’il despist femes ct desdaigne?’" (“I certainly think he
is a homosexual, for when I showed him my side, he said to me, ‘For God’s sake, take
it away!’ Wasn’t this a very good sign that he despises and disdains women?”) She uses
the word erites, which derives its secondary meaning (“homosexual”) from its primary
meaning (“heretic”). Compare Bloch, “Silence and Holes," and Alain de Lille’s De
planctu naturae for further discussion of “right” religion, grammar, and sexuality. The
Roman de Silence questions our concepts of sex roles as much as it questions our
concepts of language.
13.	This passage is a reminiscence avant la lettre of the epistle Rosencrantz and
Guildcnstcm bear in Shakespeare’s and Stoppard’s plays, as well as of the substitution
in Poe’s “Purloined Letter” and the literary-critical exchange of documents between
Derrida, Lacan, and their readers over that short story.
14.	Felix Lccoy changes this to “ance": “Corrections, Le Roman de Silence d’Hcldris
de Cornualle,” Romania 99 (1978): 117. Though it seems reasonable, I find
no corroboration for Thorpe’s gloss “anxiety" in either Godcfroy or Toblcr-Lom-
matzsch. I am grateful to Professor Michel-Andre Bossy for the reference to Lecoy’s
article, which revises Thorpe's edition of the poem thoroughly and should be used in
any study of Silence.
15.	“Ades,” v. 583, and note, p. 241.
16.	Plato, Cratylus, in The Dialogues of Plato, trans. Benjamin Jowett, 3rd cd.
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1892), 384d.
17.	Compare Monique Wittig, Les Guerillieres, trans. David Le Vay (New York:
Avon, 1973): “Unhappy one, men have expelled you from the world of symbols and
yet they have given you names, they have called you slave, you unhappy slave.
Masters, they have exercised their right to master. They write, of their authority to
accord names, that it goes back so far that the origin of language itself may be
considered an act of authority emanating from those who dominate. . . . the language
you speak is made up of words that are killing you,” as cited by Sandra M. Gilbert and
Susan Gubar, “Sexual Linguistics: Gender, Language, and Sexuality,” New Literary
History 16 (1985): 517.
18.	Gilbert and Gubar (p. 521) cite Xaviere Gauthier to similar ends: “ ‘as long as
women remain silent’—that is, as long as women remain linguistically ‘female’—‘they
will be outside the historical process. But if they begin to speak and write as men do,
they will enter history subdued and alienated' ” (“Existe-t-il une ecriture de femme?”,
trans. Marilyn A. August, in New French Feminisms, cd. Elaine Marks and Isabelle de
Courtivron [Amherst, Mass.: University of Massachusetts Press, 1980]).
19.	Lecoy removes the period from line 1657, which reads, "De Cador, de s'en-
gendreiire,” which, Lecoy states, "se rapporte d ce qui suit,” “Corrections,” p. 116.
20.	“It becomes necessary to speculate that since the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries male writers may have thought linguistic culture to be holding linguistic
anarchy at bay because they have had to translate the ‘high themes’ of the classics into
what they fear is a low language whose very accessibility might seem to vulgarize
their noble subjects” (Gilbert and Gubar, p. 532); compare also Walter J. Ong, Fighting
for Life (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1981), p. 37.
21.	Jean Bodcl, Les Saisnes, cd. E Menzel and E. Stengel (Marburg, 1906), v. 9.
22.	Dante, Convivio, 4.10.
23.	Barthes, Le Plaisir du texte, p. 19.
